Yeah.
Hello everyone. Kiara.
Kiara. Good morning. Good afternoon. Right.
Um, I'm just making sure we've got everyone from the
committee on first,
right?
Everyone there on the slick committee?
I just been, I've got a quorum, everyone. It's one o'clock.
So we get started. Uh, we've got, uh, miss, uh,
Edwards here for five minutes.
Uh, Dr. Edwards. Um, so we've only got five minutes
with you, so use time wisely.
Thank you. Okay. Okay.
Uh, Koto, um, I strongly oppose this bill.
It threatens deca, uh, democratic freedoms, breaches,
and undermines the right to dissent a right
that has protected communities from Glen.
And Za.
First protest is not a crime that is a constitutional
and human right protected under the new ze Oh,
New Zealand, um, bill of Rights con affirmed
by international law, peaceful, uh, assembly
and freedom of expression are pillars of democracy.
And I'm sure act agree with that.
This bill attempts to criminalize protest near homes,
but for many protests is about defending their homes
from Papa Kaa to refugee camps.
Resistance is survival, suppressing protests, silences,
voices of the marginalized, the dispossessed,
and those who speak truth to power.
History shows that when you,
when states silence descent, they enable injustice,
apartheid, and genocide, whether in Palestine
or silences complicity.
Second, the bill breaches Wai
Ma have POed used protest to assert their,
our Maria Papa are not just dwellings, they're political,
cultural, and spiritual centers.
Um, the vague term residential premises
sweep risks sweeping these spaces into surveillance
and suppression.
Third, the billers will disproportionately harm Maori
and other marginalized communities.
Terms like near
and targeted give police excessive discretion.
This isn't about protecting privacy, it's about suppressing
critique, especially from those most impacted
by state violence and systemic injustice.
To conclude, to conclude the bill is a step backwards.
Protest is not a threat. It's a lifeline.
Instead of, instead of upholding justice,
this government seems intent on importing repression.
I urge the committee to withdraw the bill, commit
to justice accountability,
and to your stand in solidarity
with all those resisting displacement from the fast track
protest in Wellington to Palestine.
From Wellington's, front lines to Gaza's,
rubble communities have always risen against environmental
destruction, military occupation, and state violence.
Criminalizing protests near homes
means criminalizing survival.
History shows us that when governments silence dissent,
they enable injustice, apartheid, and genocide.
Whether an al or a Palestine, silence is complicity. Sure.
Hey, well, thank you Dr. Yitz.
Uh, now, any questions from members?
Um, I'd like to ask a question.
Yeah. Thank you Ms. Nala.
Hi, doctor. Uh, Rema Ley.
Um, look, thank you for your, for your thoughts.
Um, it just struck me that, that what I'm understanding is
as though this bill would've stopped, um, the, the,
the protests that took place, for example, um, uh, um,
in front of Parliament and things like that,
that in the last year
and a half, it wouldn't have stopped them essentially when
narrow, when narrowing it down to residential properties.
Um, uh, I, yeah, so I think I'd just like
to hear your thoughts about that, that if we narrow it to,
to someone's sanctuary being their home. Okay.
So, uh, kura, you know, at the end of the day,
I suppose our sanctuary or,
or our home is a country is also, um, Wellington, um,
parliament buildings.
Um, but that's not what I referred to.
I referred to being able to, um,
'cause if this creeps in, what is next?
And we've seen that with regards to Palestine, um,
uh, recently, you know, with regards to protests,
all I'm saying is at the end of the day, it is our right
to actually, um, gather and protest.
And that's also at a home.
I think really what's happening is
that I suppose our voices have to be heard.
Now, we've seen each other on quite a few select committees
that I've spoken to,
and the majority of those bills, um,
even though opposed like the regulatory standards
bill still proceeded.
So what I'm saying is that there has to be a space
that we can safely protest.
I don't get into, um, any harm or damage.
I, you know, as Marty, we generally have a lot of flags
and we, we talk or we wire.
So I'm not talking about where it's total chaos
and there's harm and there's damage.
Yeah. It's about the voice.
So I guess doctor, uh, do we have time for
Well, just one more briefly. Yeah.
So I guess doctor, um, does
that mean we should never draw a line with respect to, um,
where or how people are protesting?
And I agree with you, you know, um, our, um, protest with,
with a lot of our Maori are variables.
But in terms of someone turning up at other people's homes
and their kids being on the front lawn,
like an example used earlier, should we not draw a line?
Do we draw a line in, um, the coalition's politics
and the impact on our families?
Because it affects more than no.
Well, I'm just saying we should be able to
express ourselves.
I just think this is the wrong move
and we should actually rethink what we are doing.
And I think it's also up to the organizers to make sure
that there's no harm, there's no damage,
no one's threatened, and that the voices are heard.
We just can't silence voices. That's complicity.
Right. Well, thank you very much, doctor, for your, um,
presentation this morning or this afternoon.
Um, and we'll see you again, no doubt.
Yes, we free Palestine
Right now. We're onto the
next, um, submitter. Um, Ms.
Cleaver, good afternoon. How are you?
Now we've got five minutes with you.
Um, so hopefully leave a little bit of time for questions.
Um, I am a poet.
My pu comes from my ku so I'm gonna tell a story.
It's winter in Wellington, almost 2000 or so.
People gather outside parliament
and begin marching up Molesworth Street
to stand against a racist regime on the other side
of the world that's denying millions
of people their freedoms.
The police wait for them at the top
and form a wall of blue and battens.
They command the crowd to stop,
but the people in front can't.
There's nowhere to go. The tide behind them keeps moving
and the officers call it defiance.
And then the air cracks, the battens swing people reel,
and the sound of pain
and protests collide in the dark,
blood streaks down their faces and pull on the pavement.
And still through wind
and sirens, shame carries on chanting voices
through the cold air.
And while that's happening here on our streets in our city,
our prime minister is in London celebrating a royal wedding.
Charles and Diana's fairytale plays across TV screens while
Wellington streets run red with the blood
of people demanding justice.
This was in 1981,
the injustice was apartheid in South Africa.
And back then those people are called agitators,
radicals, troublemakers.
But decades later, we honored them
because they stood up when this house would not,
they showed us something truly timeless.
That moral courage does not come from those in power.
It comes from the people.
And that those in power has always have always chosen
silence until they no longer could.
And that is exactly what this bill conveniently forgets.
It tells us that protest is fine as long as it's tidy,
distant, and does not disturb anyone important.
It says we agree with your right to speak,
but not if it might actually be heard.
And while it talks about privacy, we already have many laws
that protect people from harassment,
from trespassing and intimidation.
This bill criminalizes perception
and makes it an offense to cause unreasonable disruption.
A phrase by the way that lives entirely in the eye
of whoever feels uncomfortable in that given moment.
When you criminalize where people can protest,
you're not actually addressing the cause of unrest.
You're hiding behind them and punishing visibility.
You're saying the problem is not inequality,
it is not injustice, is
that someone had the nerve to notice those things.
And this house time
and time again has shown that it does not want
to know why people are protesting.
Right. Because knowing that would mean, God forbid,
you must do something about it.
When workers strike, when renters march, when nurses
and teachers demand fairness, it is because every quiet
and reasonable plea was ignored.
And this bill will only make it easier for that to happen.
And I'm told that this is about balance.
However, d democracy's balance is not about the relationship
between noise and order.
It's between power
and accountability between those who govern
and those who give consent to be governed.
And when power rigs the scales in its own favor,
what you get is not calm.
What you get is submission.
And look around at the world today,
governments everywhere are tightening the rules on protest.
And the justifications all sound the same.
The bill fits the same global pattern, a slow,
deliberate shrinking of democratic value.
So I have to ask this committee plainly, do you really want
to be remembered for this meeting calls of justice?
Not with empathy, but with reactionary
and cowardly legislation?
Because once we start down that path,
it's pretty hard to turn back.
Protest is messy, it's disruptive,
it's inconvenient, it's necessary.
Every movement that is bent, the moral arc
of this country toward justice has done so
by speaking truth to power.
It's what gives this country a spine.
It's what keeps those in parliament honest
when they forget who they serve.
And that's exactly why this bill is so insidious.
It's designed to make protests invisible,
to push dissent out of sight to the edges of public life
where those in power do not have to look at it.
The danger to democracy is not people demanding justice.
It is politicians who are too afraid to listen.
It's my recommendation
that the committee should reject this undemocratic waste
of time and resources.
Bill Koto.
Okay, now we're out of time, but I'll allow one question.
Does any member wants ask question?
Yeah, please proceed.
It's, um, thank you so much for your submission, um, uh,
a powerful submission from the heart.
Um, can I ask you, what do you think?
Um, you know, the passage of this bill, um, says
to young people who are looking at the parliamentarians, um,
working through a process of making a,
making a rule like this
Kda. Um,
it tells our future generations that you are not going
to be heard and we're actually,
and that the people in power want to make it so
that it's easier for them not to hear you.
And that's a pretty demoralizing thing to be saying
to Ahi in this country. Sure.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you for your submission this afternoon, KDA.
Right now we've got, um, Ms. Amanda Thomas,
who I hope is there in person.
Is that right?
No, she's canceled. Is that right? So she's not available.
Okay. So we'll move to Mr. Minto. Is he available?
He's online apparently. Yes.
Afternoon, Mr. Minto there? Yes, I'm here.
Good to see if now we've got, uh, five minutes with you.
Um, no, we've got 10 minutes with you actually. Sorry.
Uh, full is yours,
KDA. Well, thank you.
Um, thank you Mr. Bailey.
And thank you to, um, the committee
for the opportunity to present here.
Um, I've been involved in, in protest over, over, um,
a number of decades now,
and I was really surprised to see this, uh,
proposed legislation come up
because it seems to me that, um, protest
outside, uh, residences, um, is, uh,
is, is, is, is is quite rare apart from, um, the, the issue
with, uh, Winston Peters a couple of weeks ago.
These situations outside MPS houses, for example, are,
are very, very rare.
And, um, I I was really,
as I say, really surprised to see it become an issue, mainly
because the existing laws we have are quite capable
of dealing with anything, any disruption
or any unsavory behavior
or whatever, um, at outside anybody's house, just as they,
just as, um, the same rules would would apply for,
for a protest anywhere else.
So, for example, I mean,
the courts are always looking at these, these issues.
They, they look at time, place
and circumstance where something's happening
and make a judgment about whether it's reasonable
or un unreasonable.
And it seems to me that, um, the protest themselves
outside Mr.
Peter's house, um, were, uh, were dealt with
by the police under the existing law.
And there was no problem with that.
The problem came when somebody, um,
when a window got smashed
and clearly a window being smashed is, you know, as part
of a protest, uh, the person was, was arrested
or the, the alleged perpetrator has been arrested and,
and will go before the court.
So, and I think the same thing applies, um,
to any other kind of behavior.
The police were able to deal with it,
the people were reasonable.
They, they, um, they didn't go outside
what they were requested to do by the police at the time.
And there was no, no reason to, uh, for,
for, you know, the public to be worried or the, or the, um,
or the, or the, you know, the MP
or whatever to be, to be concerned.
So I, I'm really looking at this
and saying that there, there seems to me to be
no particular, there's no upsurge in, in protests
outside MPS houses.
Um, there's no, you know,
this has not become an issue.
Uh, and it, it shouldn't be the subject
of legislation which encroaches on people's rights
to protest the right to protest under the Bill of Rights.
It's, it's just a very, a very broad right.
And there is no need to restrict it beyond the laws,
which we already have over things like disorderly behavior
and, um, trespass
and, uh, you know, offensive language and that kind of thing.
So that's what I had to say.
Um, I hope that the, the committee will simply
park this piece of legislation, put it aside
and say, look, this, um, you know, our,
our existing laws can deal with any situation
that might arise that causes concern to mps or,
or anybody else for that matter.
Okay, thank you. Hey, um,
I'm gonna ask you a question I do respectfully, um,
because I know you've been involved, as you said,
long in a lot of protests.
So you, in the, your report talk about warnings
and there is no warnings.
So what, in the protests that you've been, um,
involved in, uh, how have you seen the police treat
protesters and when have you seen them move to a situation
where they will, will address, will arrest someone?
So, so what I'm trying to get
to you is under the current rules, what has been the trigger
that brings that about?
Um, well, that's a, it's a really broad question, Andrew.
It's, um, uh,
because the, you know, protests are, are of various kinds
and various places, but if there's a,
if there's a civil disobedience protest, for example,
and the police are, um,
and just for example, people are, people are,
are blocking a road, the police will come
and they will ask people to move.
And generally they'll give them warnings and, um, uh, and,
and then people make a decision
whether they're going to move or not.
And if they, if they're prepared to,
or they, they feel strongly enough about something, then,
then they may take that civil disobedience step and just,
and not comply with a, with a police request.
And there is a very, very long history ino
and around the world of people doing that
to make their protests more, more effective.
And I think that's something that, um, I think something
that we should all be, we should all be proud of.
Um, in general, um, the vast majority
of time when there's a protest, um, the police will come up,
we'll talk to, to the people who are, who are there,
and there'll be a respectful conversation about what's,
about what's going on, what's happening.
And, um, there will be, um, you know, no need for the,
for the, for the police to, in, in intervene at all.
But as I say, if there,
if it's a civil disobedience protest, then, you know, um,
and I haven't seen any of those occur
outside an n Peace House, for example.
Um, then there, there, there should just be this,
the same sort of, I think, respectful conversation
with pe which people had with the police
outside Winston Peter's house.
Right. Okay. Members who, who would like to ask question,
Mr. Chair, please? Um,
yeah, if you don't
Mind, uh, Mr. Ley.
Yeah. So, uh, you said earlier that instances like this,
that you mentioned about, um, people protesting in front
of a politician's home is quite rare.
And you just said now that people make decisions whether
they wanna comply or not, when police, for example,
the example you gave approach people
that are on a road or something.
Um, I wanna ask you, if you, every night at around
or in the middle of the night around three
or 4:00 AM in the morning, had people banging pots
and pans in front of your home with all those pretty books
behind you, and maybe you're up at
4:00 AM trying to read a book.
How would you feel about that? Every night?
Every morning, rather 3:00 AM in the morning,
banging pots and pans.
Do you think that's acceptable?
Well, And the police come and they decide,
but the people banging the pots
and pans decide they don't wanna comply this time police
That Form Mr. Mento.
But, but this legislation that,
that you are proposing wouldn't, uh, is,
is simply not needed.
If the police deem that to be disorderly behavior,
banging pots and pans in, in, in the middle of the night,
then I would expect they would come and,
and warn people. And but
You just said that people decide whether they
wanna comply or not, and
That's No, no, no.
Yeah, we're talking about something completely different.
The, the police are we, what we, what I, what I'm saying is,
and, and that's really important.
This is the really important point.
What I'm saying is that if somebody was outside, uh,
my house or your house, or anyone's house banging pots
and pans at three o'clock in the morning, at
3:00 AM in the morning, Yeah, yeah.
The existing law will deal with that, the
Existing law. But what you're also saying
he finished is that it's up
to people whether they wanna comply
or not, according to the existing, of course.
Course it. So that's why we need the
finished, so that homes can be
A sanctuary. Okay.
Let's just hear from Mr. Minto. Yep.
Yeah. Look, look, I, I think you're missing,
you're missing the point completely with
or without this proposed law.
Um, the police can deal with
that situation very in a very straightforward way,
And they have been so far with your lot.
Please let people finish.
Beg your pardon? With, with my lot.
I'm sorry, I, I'm not sure who you're
Talking about. No. Mr.
Manto, can you please have you finished,
because I'm gonna take another question in a minute.
Are you wanna be finished answering?
I just really, yeah, look, I just really wanna make the,
I really wanna stress this point
that I'm not advocating for.
Um, you know, we are not advocating for
unlawful behavior here.
We're simply saying that, um, that existing law can deal
with any situation Okay.
Outside an MP's house.
Right. I'm gonna take a question from Ms. Walters.
Thanks. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and maybe just quickly, the, the examples
that some members have given are
covered by the existing law.
So breach of the piece, the police would have the power.
Oh, can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Yes. Yes.
Yep. So, breach of the piece of power, uh,
the police would've, the power to arrest.
And the example that Mr. Bates gave earlier is under section
four of the Summary Offenses Act,
so the police have those powers.
Um, and this was my question really, is that, um,
I, I was wanting Mr.
Mintos view on the IPCA report, which is really the genesis
for the, this proposed change.
Mm-hmm. So it's lifted out of that report.
Now, the I-P-C-C-A were essentially saying,
if other changes are made to the law,
which would restrict the application of the current law
to the right to protest, then you would need this
as a, to fill that gap, essentially.
Now we aren't changing the rest
of the law, disorderly is still there.
Mm-hmm. Breach of the pieces still there.
Um, so we are essentially filling a gap,
that gap we didn't create by making those other changes.
And I just wondered if you had comment on the IP CA report?
Um, well, I think, I thought the IPCA report was, um,
to be, to be really thank frank.
I thought it was a, it was a, um, uh, an incredibly
really surprising
and very highly prescriptive, uh, approach to, to,
um, to policing protests.
And it's a, it's a, it's a situation where,
um, where in, in, in the uk, um,
they're moving down this line.
I mean, I mean, restrictions on the right
to protest are c are are certainly coming in
around the Western world or being proposed
or being advocated for.
And I don't think New Zealand needs
to go anywhere near there.
We should, we should keep right, right, right away from it.
I thought the IPCA report was a huge overreach
and was based on, I think,
two particular situations.
The protest outside parliament
and the protest against Posey Parker using those two
examples, um, the IPCA were bringing in a, a,
a massive round of, um, heavy restrictions on,
on the right to protest really heavy restrictions
where you have to, you know, traffic permits, uh, you know,
traffic plans and, uh, police permits
and council permission and all this sort of thing.
Yeah. But, but what we are talking about here is something
that just, which just seems to me to be, um,
completely unnecessary.
As you say that the breach of the peace, um,
somebody can be ar arrested on breach of the peace
that they don't even appear in court.
It's not a, it's not a charge as such.
It's simply, um, uh, a law that allows police
to remove people from a particular situation if they feel
that that disorder could, could break out.
Um, I'm not advocating for, for, for Breach of the Peace,
um, uh, but I'm saying that existing law is,
is is wholly adequate to deal with anything that may arise.
Alright. Hey, thank you Mr.
Minto, uh, for your contribution this afternoon.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Um, the people against prisons out here, roa,
um, you welcome.
Are they here? Is it Tom or Tom Pierce?
Yeah. Have a slightly different name, but that's good.
Um, we've got five minutes, uh, 10 minutes
with you before yours.
Thank you, Andrew. Um, yeah, my name's Tom.
Uh, I'm speaking on behalf of Papa People against Prison.
I, um, just for anyone who isn't familiar with us,
we're a prison abolitionist organization.
Uh, we work for a Farris Safer and more just Altura.
Um, puff is also an organization
that does carry out things like public gatherings
and demonstrations and stuff.
So, uh, we obviously have, uh, quite a lot of concern about
a bill like this that restricts the right to protest.
Um, I, I hope that I don't actually have
to convince anyone here that protest is a really
important democratic, right.
And we, I think we're all aware
that there's this really troubling trend, you know, um,
John Andto was talking about it, that this,
this really troubling trend around the world of,
of eroding that right to protest.
And I really don't want, we don't want
to see that happening in New Zealand.
You know, the, the United States is the obvious
and glaring example here, where previously we,
we might have looked to them as a, a good example of, of,
you know, freedom of speech and, and political rights.
But now we're seeing people in the United States arrested
and deported for their political views.
Um, the UK has prescribed a a protest organization.
We really don't want New Zealand to go out down this path.
And, um, so that's one of the reasons
that we are opposing this bill in its entirety.
Um, the bill kind of claims to be about, you know,
balancing the right to privacy with the right to protest.
But, um, again, uh, many of the things
that I'm gonna say was it's, um, I'm sort
of rehashing the conversation that was just had
with, with John Minto.
You know, that there are existing
protections for the right to privacy.
You know, there's local bylaws, um, that kept the,
the protest outside Winston Peter's house, um, sort of,
you know, stop them from being too noisy or disruptive.
Um, police were present.
Police have adequate powers at the moment to,
to have acted if they needed to outside, um,
Winston Peter's house, but they didn't need to.
And obviously the fact that someone, um, later on came
and smashed this window, uh, the spill,
you know, doesn't, doesn't touch that.
That was already illegal. The spill isn't gonna make it more
illegal for someone to do that.
Um, what the spill would do instead is just sort
of preemptively shut down a lot of protests.
You know, it's the, the rulings
around whether it's a protest is overly disruptive,
is quite a subjective judgment
that the courts would need to make.
And in the meantime, you know, the, you've had police come
and shut down a protest, which is often,
in many cases would've been a legitimate protest.
You know, New Zealand has quite an important history
of these sorts of protests,
and I think the protests against the Dawn raids were a
really effective example of this.
Um, it's not often that, that people go
and protest outside NPS houses.
Um, and usually when it happens,
it's over a very, very serious issue.
You know, like the, a genocide
that's happening at the moment, or, um, the dawn rates,
you know, back when they were happening.
Um, and the other effect
that we are concerned about is just a sort
of a chilling effect on protests
more generally, more broadly.
You know, we, if people are worried about being criminalized
for peaceful, legitimate protests,
then they won't engage in that.
Um, and that's a really be a really tragic thing
for us to see as a country.
So I, I understand how you all feel as mps,
you know, you do wanna feel safe and secure and,
and not be disrupted,
but I I really do think that you need to step back from
that role and, and understand this law.
You're making this law for the country, not necessarily just
for yourselves, you know,
and it's, it's slightly cheesy thing to say,
but you have to step back and consider whether this bill is
good for our democracy or whether it's just
good for you personally.
Um, so, you know,
I I understand you have real invalid safety concerns.
Um, the existing, it's, you know, harming,
harming mps is never gonna be legal,
and we're not suggesting that that's why we make it.
Um, but,
but we do ask that you, you really step back from your
personal lives and, and consider
that this law affects the country, not not just you, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah. That, um, Mr. Bait, Mr. Bates,
Thanks, uh, chair.
Uh, thank you for your submission.
Um, we've heard earlier today that
there are circumstances
that people feel it would be appropriate to stand
outside an MP's house while the kids are on the trampoline
and shout things that would include, uh, how
that MP feels about their kids being killed
and that being an appropriate protest outside, uh,
an MP's home.
I wanna know if a, you feel that would be appropriate,
and b, the impact you think it will have on our democracy
if people looking at these exhibitions this afternoon
and this morning are including, uh,
different groups within our society, um, females,
younger moms
and dads, um, like myself with kids, about
how they would feel about putting themselves forward
for office if that is becoming, uh,
or seen as the accepted norm for protests?
Uh, no. I mean, I don't think that's acceptable,
and I, I think as, as we all know, that that kind
of abusive behavior is not currently permitted.
Um, so I don't think this bill is going to,
to protect democracy
in the way that you're talking about here.
So if that, um, not acceptable,
then your statement earlier that there are issues
that justify protests outside
MP's homes really isn't entirely true then
because there are circumstances
where it would be entirely reasonable for the police
to remove a protest outside MP's homes, uh,
and tell those protestors to go down to the office
or go down to a public space, um,
and allow those spaces that we have for our family
and whanau who didn't, uh, get elected to Parliament
to be able to enjoy their private life, um,
in peace and quiet,
Certainly. And, and I
think the police have plenty
of powers already to do that.
Um, what this bill would do is target legitimate process.
So the previous speaker indicated
that the previous submitter indicated, uh, that there,
that there may be powers the police have at the moment,
but the, that the, um, that the outcome
that the police have the ability
to actually really hold people to account
for when they do things that are aggres,
as have been described by submitters earlier in the day.
Um, this bill would give police, um, a really clear
ability to say, this is not only out of order,
but we will, will hold you to account to a standard
that I would suggest most New Zealanders would see
as acceptable for the sort of behavior I've
Just been talking about.
Yep. But it will also give the police, uh, a, a mandate
not just, uh, their discretion,
but a mandate to, to shut down protests that are legitimate,
that most New Zealand schools would see as legitimate.
Okay. I'm gonna go to Dr. Nan.
Thank you Chair. Um, just a question to you.
Thank you for your submission
and we kind of hear a lot of different sides,
and I understand what you're saying in terms
of the current legislation
or you have mechanisms in place
that addresses those kind of threats.
Um, but one of the things I want to check is
what the end do you think is the chilling effect, um,
to democracy
and freedom of speech if a law like this is implemented?
Because we also heard from submitters earlier that this sort
of legislation is akin to a fascist state
and it's a move towards fascism.
Yeah, I mean, as, as I said earlier, um, if,
if people are worried or are concerned about potentially
being criminalized, potentially coming away from a protest,
a legitimate, peaceful protest with a criminal record, then
you know, far fewer people
will, will feel comfortable doing.
I mean, I, I myself wouldn't, you know, I I,
my job depends on me not having a criminal record.
Um, so it, you know, it would make it a lot harder for me
to go and exercise my political rights to, uh, you know, to,
to peaceful protests.
Alright. Um, uh, Ms.
Cle, but just this is the last question.
Um, Tom, the,
the new offense we are hoping to, um, to
make into law is specifically this engaging in targeted
and disruptive demonstration near residential premises.
It's not protesting that we are disallow protests.
It's not saying you can't protest altogether, it's engaging
in targeted and disruptive
demonstration near residential premises.
If you don't mind, can you please make sure that you share
that with the people that are concerned
that democracy is not being dismantled?
This is a targeted new offense that we're bringing in
to make sure that people feel safe in their homes.
Um, certainly,
but I think miss you need to reflect on what,
what a protest actually is.
You know, this is, I'm not talking about
people standing quietly on a corner.
That's not a protest, right?
I'm not talking about people hurling abuse either.
Um, what I'm talking about is people making themselves,
making their demands aware.
You know, if you're not shouting out your
demands, then disruptive.
You're certainly, yeah. Yeah.
And you know what,
what police officer is not gonna hear loud noise in the
street, people shouting out their political demands and,
and understand that as being disruptive
and then shut the process down the
Residential premises.
Yeah. Okay. Hey, thank you Mr. Pierce for your
submission this afternoon.
Um, and thank you for taking those questions.
Right Members, we're gonna cut out of the,
um, public session.
We're going back into private.